right well good afternoon everybody this
is a talk called snowball earth and it's
a bit of planetary science or one or two
bits of astronomy thrown in along the
way but what we're going to do is look
at the history of the whole of the
geological time frame of the earth to
begin with so this diagram on the right
here shows the ages of the earth that
geologists carve up the whole four and a
half billion years of the Earth's
history into into these various sizes
and different slices now what you notice
is that each slice is associated with a
different group of fossils so here we
have the Jurassic and is he a classic -
or fossils that go with that period okay
and the timeframe here that's 200
million 145 million years ago which I
sometimes abbreviate in this talk to my
a and here we are it's up up here
it was x if we go all the way back you
see that only this print only for 541
million years ago for the beginning of
this period called Cambrian and then as
a huge chunk here that's just a bozo
ik-keun exactly vast majority of the
life period of the earth fossils
associated over on the side here so
interesting that colleges have based
their classification on what fossils
they find in the rocks and when they run
out of fossils they've just said wow
there's nothing going on there
and that's actually 70% of the life and
of the whole of the earth so the earth
was formed out of the material orbiting
around the Sun and all of the planets
were formed out of that same whirling
cloud of gas and dust that got together
under gravity it probably resulted in a
whole lot of small planetoids small
planets and then they eventually either
collided and destroyed each other or
collided and merged to the point where
we ended up with the major planets that
we have now
but those collisions would have caused
enormous amounts of energy to be
released and so for the very first
period of the history of the earth it
would have been hell on earth for the
Hadean era named after Hades for that
reason they would have seen the surface
of the earth covered in molten lava for
a substantial number of hundreds of
millions of years perhaps
after perhaps the three thousand eight
hundred million years ago so given that
a little bit of time responsible for
allowing the earth to cool down right
through to 600 million years ago we have
the Precambrian era it's the bottom part
of that first diagram and it's a vast
stretch of time 70 percent of the entire
history of the earth is the Precambrian
period and again no fossils in this
period or so they thought to begin with
nowadays when we study the rocks that
are left there are some fractions of
rock left from this era we do find the
presence of microscopic fossils in some
parts of the world
I love this picture I think it's very
good representation of what the
Precambrian era might have looked like
with enormous volcanoes and an ocean
there and then perhaps lots of hot
springs on the shoreline and one or two
of those round a blobby looking things
that are sitting in the edge of the
ocean those things are called
stromatolites and they are in fact Nets
of bacteria their very oldest and most
archaic forms of life were the
single-celled bacteria and they grow up
forming these mats and lumps
accumulating minerals out of the tidal
areas of the ocean and you still find
them in some parts of the world today
this is a photograph taken just off the
coast of Australia where there are still
these very ancient colonies of bacteria
they're still alive but haven't changed
in three billion years and the whole of
that Precambrian era seemed to be
dominated by this and this alone this is
why we didn't find any fossils it was
all these single-celled organisms living
their lives almost unchanged unchanged
for three billion years and so it's been
dubbed slime world three billion years
of slime and then five hundred and forty
five million years ago something changed
suddenly the oceans are full of
fossilized creatures or the remains of
them are they of today and the ocean
would have teamed with life these early
forms of trilobite and this guy up here
with the enormous jaws and eyes
Norman Icarus then you got some belly
fish and other tubes and things like
living on the ocean floor
at this stage all life was confined to
living in the ocean
but before I go on too much further we
must have a little word about how we
know how old the rocks are and the way
that we do it is using radioactive
isotopes you may have heard of the term
half-life and this is where a
radioactive atom or a group of
radioactive atoms randomly decay into
lesser more stable atoms and so either
Illustrated that here with uranium
decaying too late it's actually decays
through a number of intermediate steps
but the point is the same so after a
newly formed piece of rock has been
solidified perhaps deposited in a lava
flow from a volcano it will contain all
of the elements that are normally found
in whatever the rock is made of and
perhaps that might mean it carries
uranium with it but over time randomly
each few million years a certain number
of the certain proportion of the uranium
atoms decay and so you gradually get a
higher and higher amount of lead
compared to uranium in there and as long
as they're not getting washed out or
weathered away in any other way you can
use that to work out how long it has
been since the rock was formed so that's
how we do the radio dating radioisotope
dating another thing that is an
important part of this puzzle that I'm
going to go on to is the idea of
continental drift and I don't know if
you ever looked at the BBC used to have
the globe on there every time the news
came on I always looked at it and saw
that South America and Africa look like
they ought to fit together but I wasn't
the first person because in 1858
Antoniou Schneider Pellegrini noticed
that fit and suggested that perhaps the
continents had once been joined
drifted apart
but he didn't really have any evidence
for it to start with and it wasn't until
a bit later when Alfred Wegener came
along and he suggested that the
consonants might have moved he also
noticed that fit together and confirmed
it by studying the rocks from both
Africa and South America and seeing that
the ordering and the sizes of the layers
match perfectly so they have been torn
apart and we were able to establish that
the surface of the earth is cut up onto
all these separate plates some of them
are ocean plates like the Pacific others
carry a continent around on top of them
and they jostle for position and move
around this is a process that we now
call plate tectonics it's responsible
for the Ring of Fire the volcanic
activity around the Pacific there where
the Pacific plate is bashing into either
the American plate or the asiatic and
Australian plates and where the ocean
plate hits the continental plates it
tends to lose this is because it's more
dense it's actually more dense because
it's saturated with water from the ocean
it would be wouldn't it every little
nook and cranny in the rock is filled in
with water molecules so there's no gaps
that makes it more dense and when the
two but up against each other the ocean
crust loses and gets forced down deep
into the earth and remelted and the
oceanic crust kind of floats over the
top but then the water that's carried
down in that ocean crust trapped in all
the crevices boils off due to the
extreme heat in the middle of the earth
and forces its way back to the surface
creating the Ring of Fire ash volcanoes
all the way along the edge there now
the ocean crust is disappearing there
then something must be being made
somewhere else cuz they surface area of
the earth is staying the same that's at
the mid-ocean ridges so there's a
mid-ocean ridge right down the center of
the Atlantic there on the left-hand side
drawn in false color and we're talking
with the colors about the ages
so red is new and yellow not so new
Green is older and bluer the oldest
rocks in the Atlantic and they're at the
edges and again they get crushed and
subducted away at the edges a new
material gets brought up from the center
but the result of all this is that the
continents move around and it wasn't
really very well understood until the
1960s that this was an important part of
understanding the history of the planet
there is a photograph that I took up in
Svalbard its Spitsbergen north of Norway
78 degrees north and you can see the
glacier coming down and meeting the sea
there and the amazing colors of the ice
the bluey white and the dirty material
kept being carried along the top of the
glacier where rocks from the surrounding
mountains have fallen into it and then
as it gets carried down to the sea the
ice then melts you can see a nice little
iceberg in the foreground there but any
rocky material of course gets dumped
once the ice melts that falls to the
seafloor in those positions and often
you get great big boulders and they
called drop stones so a classic marker
that there has been a glacier somewhere
is to find these layers of silt from the
Garcia with occasional large boulders in
them as in the picture on the right
there a fossilized drop stone from
another site now if struck astronomical
impact on all of this with the
glaciation comes from a number of
sources but one of them is called the
Milankovitch cycles at least have to do
with the orbit of the earth so the orbit
of the earth is a little bit elliptical
around the Sun as a longer axis and a
shorter axis and the Earth's spin axis
is tilted relative to that and all of
these possible parameters change in
cycles so the eccentricity the ratio of
A to B on the diagram there how
elliptical it is changes back-and-forth
with a hundred thousand year period the
tilt of the whole of the orbit relative
to the tilt of the orbits of the other
planets changes every 41,000 years and
the wobble of the Earth's ax
this has two periods to it one of 26,000
in one of 21,000 years and so things get
really quite complicated if you plot the
overall amount of energy that there is
received by the earth because it's all
coming from the Sun so if the distance
from the Earth or the angle of tilt away
from the Sun of the polar regions
changes then the amount of energy
received the northern and southern most
extremes during the different seasons
changes and that can be plotted here
this is for 65 degrees north so northern
Norway and you can see how over
thousands of years the power received
from the Sun wobbles about according to
the some of the effects of all of those
cycles and so sometimes it's receiving
perhaps only four hundred and forty
watts per square meter other times it's
five hundred and forty watts per square
meter and that's going to make a big
difference to its tendency to retain ice
so the glaciers tend to advance and
retreat according to the beat of this
particular pattern help this is where
the story starts to get really
interesting indeed
this is a photograph taken by a
scientist called Paul Hoffman is the
real star of this story and it's a drop
stone you can see the layers of silts
there and the large boulder that's
thumped into them and made a dent and
then been fossilized in position and
exposed and there's a queen for scale
there and this is in layers of sediment
that are dated by radiological dating to
600 million years ago so just before
that can Brehon period where all the
fossilized life suddenly appeared
now above and below these layers where
we found the drop stone there are layers
of carbonate rocks that suggest that
they were formed in shallow seas with a
warm temperature
but this rock formation is in Namibia
Southwest Africa and Namibia today is a
hot dry desert and the last thing you
would expect to find there is a glacier
so one explanation is will perhaps the
continents have moved and maybe Namibia
was somewhere colder 600 million years
ago but Paul Hoffman decided to
investigate this a bit more thoroughly
and he took samples from the same period
all around the world 600 million year
old rocks and he kept finding more drop
stones here's one from Canada large
boulders pushing down on those rusty
banded formations both above and below
the layer of Glacial drop stones
now surely not all the consonants could
have been at the pole at the same time
they just wouldn't fit you can't have
every continent on earth
being a polar continent there's just not
enough room at the poles so that's a bit
suspicious
unfortunately you're able to get a
handle on this because of the Earth's
magnetic field when rocks are laid down
they they trap and remember the Earth's
magnetism and in particular they trap
the direction and the angle of the field
lines you can see on the right there the
earth looks like it's got a bar magnet
through it and you can see the field
lines going from north to south and back
and if you're at the poles then the
field lines meet the ground nearly
vertically but as you move further south
you can see that the field lines down at
the equator are going almost parallel
horizontally to to the ground that's
called the dip angle and if you measure
the dip angle that's in the fossilised
magnetic field in your rocks you can
work out the latitude at which they were
formed they might have moved after they
were formed but that is the latitude
they were formed at because when they're
liquid they don't trap the magnetic
field when they solidify as they're
being formed they trap the field there
and then and by doing that he discovered
that his rocks in Namibia told him that
the field was horizontal and that the
six hundred million year old glacier was
therefore formed at the equator
now nobody believed him there is another
picture I took when I went up to spell
Bart and here we've got some layered
rocks sedimentary rocks laid out in
layers you can clearly see them running
horizontally and down at the bottom just
above the water line there we've got a
layer of reddish colored Boulder Clay's
these are indicative again of glaciers
of ice on the move well this is Felber
at 78 North no one should be surprised
but again these are ancient Precambrian
rocks and you can show by looking at the
magnetic field but at the time spell
bard was in the tropics and above them
and below them there are carbonates that
again form in warm waters and we know
that spell bard was making its way north
all for the last 600 million years ago
it's moved up along and to reach its
current position by studying this
magnetic dip in the different layers so
all of this is pointing to the fact that
it didn't matter where you were on earth
there was a global ice age the earth the
earth perhaps would have looked
something like this
completely covered in a layer of ice
many kilometers thick
and one reason for this who has worked
out when they were first doing some of
the computer climate models to try and
understand the the behavior of the
Earth's atmosphere in its climate and
what they realized was that ice reflects
the light much better than the heat much
better back out into space than either
land or ocean and so as the ice grows
during an ice age it actually causes an
acceleration in its own rate of growth
because it makes the planet more
reflective overall and so it accelerates
away from the first beginnings of an ice
age and they calculated that once it
reached the tropics where most of the
heat of the Sun is landing it would
reflect it away and run away and be a
runaway process and create a full
snowball
but then in a double-whammy
the extreme cold of that snowball earth
would be about minus 40 degrees
centigrade and so all the water vapor in
the atmosphere would freeze out onto the
surface adding to the ice and drying the
atmosphere
but water is a very powerful greenhouse
gas and hate helps keep the temperature
of the planet warm for us at the moment
without it we'd be at minus 20 or so
most of the time but with it frozen on
to the surface at minus 40 it's gonna
make it even more likely to stay cold
because you just look at it letting even
more of the heat get back out to space
and so this locks the whole planet in no
escape from the snowball well there must
have been because we don't see this
today so how did it get away how did it
break out of this the answer turns out
to be volcanoes all of that heat of
formation of the earth from the impacts
during the Hadean period created a
planet with a solid crust eventually but
still with a very hot molten interior
and all of that heat is still bursting
out through volcanic eruptions and it
brings with it into the atmosphere
lots of gases carbon dioxide being one
of the most important ones and so while
you have the snowball earth the
volcanoes are still delivering carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere
but normally carbon dioxide flows in a
cycle
what happens is that the carbon dioxide
dissolves in the water vapor in the
atmosphere and rains out as dilute
carbonic acid onto the mountains and the
hills then it reacts with the rock with
the silicates in the rock and dissolves
them and flows down in in dissolved
solution in the rivers into the oceans
and then precipitates out as carbon in
calcium carbonate onto this ocean floor
and then of course the ocean floor
eventually gets subducted back down
underneath the continents again only for
the carbon dioxide to be re-released by
heating to come up back up through the
next volcano and that process of going
right round that loop takes about 200
million years for carbon dioxide to go
right round that recycling process
that's happening all the time except
when you have a snowball earth situation
all of the rock is prevented from
reacting with the carbon dioxide because
it's covered in ice it's not accessible
to the carbon dioxide in the air and
there's no water in the air either
because that's all frozen out hard as
iron in ice and so the carbon dioxide
doesn't form into acid rain and if it
did it wouldn't actually manage to get
to the rocks and react with them so the
cycle is broken and carbon dioxide just
builds up and up and up in the
atmosphere
we have about 440 parts per million of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere at the
moment we've managed to quadruple that
in the last hundred years from 100 parts
per million
but during the snowball earth if it got
to 7500 parts per million which is
vastly greater so the greenhouse effect
was building up and of course that is
what warmed the planet back up
eventually melting the ice another
curious feature of the geology around
that time is these banded iron deposits
now if we go right back to 2000 million
years ago - giggles ago - gee why a life
was just inventing photosynthesis and
pouring oxygen into the atmosphere and
all the iron that had until then been
dissolved in the oceans having been
brought up from the deep earth by events
suddenly found itself being oxidized and
deposited as well it's what is
essentially rust there hematite layers
that you can see in this rock and you
can see it went in waves you have iron
being deposited and then other minerals
but a vast amount of iron was deposited
out in these huge banded iron formations
caused by life changing the atmosphere
well that's a long time ago that was
2000 million years ago we're talking
about the Curiosity of this glaciation
of 600 million years ago
but we found the same thing these banded
iron formations occurring in that
Precambrian period around 600 million
years ago more evidence of these iron
accumulations happening again now that's
very curious because and somehow that
meant iron had reoccur Malay 'td in the
ocean and then got itself dumped they
want the snowball conditions of course
the undersea vents were still pushing
met metals and metal salts into the deep
ocean but again the ice layer is acting
as a barrier to the atmosphere and so
the oxygen in the atmosphere is not able
to rust this iron and caused it to cause
it to precipitate out so it would build
up and up and up to a very high
concentration until those volcanoes have
caused the carbon dioxide to reach those
enormous levels as I said over a
thousand times today's level was reached
and create a massive greenhouse effect
that would bring the temperatures up and
melt the ice cracking the snowballs grip
and immediately then when that happened
the oxygen in the atmosphere is able to
get at the iron in the water again and
precipitate these layers out so the
whole story starts to fit together and
explain some very curious features now
what happens then is of course you get
vast overshoot and the carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere has caused this huge
greenhouse effect and so vast amounts of
water are now evaporated back up into
the atmosphere and that adds to the
greenhouse causing his potential runaway
to the hot extremes and the temperature
soars back up from minus 40 to plus 40
in very short order now this is quite a
climate catastrophe really
eventually the exposure of the rocks to
that enormous and acid rain storms that
would have happened with all that carbon
dioxide and water raining back onto the
near exposed rock on the land brings
things back to balance the carbon
dioxide is sucked back out of the
atmosphere back into the oceans and
precipitated and so you end up back with
a fairly normal planet again quite a
wild ride though for a while the
question what triggered it off in the
first place was it just the Milankovitch
cycles causing an ice age
well actually the continental drift was
partly responsible as well before all
this happened about 750 million years
ago that all of the major continents
that we have got together to form a
supercontinent that we now call Rodina
another land and it was mostly at the
tropics
now it makes a difference to the climate
of the earth where the continents are
because most of the heat arrives at the
tropics the low angle of attack of the
sunlight coming in to the polar regions
is why they're colder but they land in
the ocean also effect this because they
absorb the heat differently if you have
land at the pole then the land will
could potentially become ice-covered
and that stops it pulling carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere and increases the
green greenhouse warming so land at the
poles tends to make for a warmer climate
and slow at the advance of any ice so
that makes for a bit of negative
feedback if the land in the poles is
covered in ice then you get more
greenhouse gases building up in the
atmosphere and that tends to make the
ice retreat again but if you have land
at the equator the land reflects more
heat to space the ocean is very good at
absorbing it so if you have ocean at the
equator you absorb heat you have land at
the equator you tend to reflect it so
land at the equator tends to make it
colder climate
and if as the ice is advancing from the
poles it's doing so over the ocean not
over the land masses then there's no
reduction in weathering no reduction in
carbon dioxide being pulled out of the
atmosphere and so no increased
greenhouse effect to slow the inverse of
the ice and so when you have land at the
equator and not at the poles the ice can
advance a lot further and it can reach
that critical tipping point where enough
of the surface of the earth is now
ice-covered
for it to do the runaway to completion
and all this led to snowball cycling the
period 750 million to 590 million years
ago they were actually three occurrences
of these snowball periods interspersed
with the enormous hot house conditions
of a runaway greenhouse effect
so each snowball leads to carbon dioxide
induced retreat and a hot house and then
it goes back the other way
restore turns to normal you can see it
in this diagram and we've got a plot of
the surface temperature which we can
also work out so you can see from the
bottom there at 750 million years ago
things suddenly took a turn for the
colder side and then it went into the
snowball episodes and eventually broke
back out of it and returned to normal
all it was waiting for was a nudge from
those Milankovitch orbital cycles to tip
it into the snowball and it's all due to
the position of the the continents being
at the equator but the final escape from
the this snowballing is when the large
supercontinent Rodinia broke up so it
formed at the top there 835 million
years ago in the north polar regions
migrated southwards to the equator 750
million years ago and began that
snowball cycling period but as it moved
further south it started to break up and
by the time we got to five hundred and
thirty million years ago there was
enough land now at the polar regions to
stop the runaway snowball effect
also being able to trace her previous
occurrence of this happening and that
was way back even before those little
blue green algae had got to work on the
atmosphere and invented photosynthesis
this is 2,400 million years ago deep in
the Precambrian again
well there are evidence in some parts of
the world of drop stones and these
overlying carbonates which are the
signature of a snowball earth and again
it turns out there was another coming
together of most of the major continents
India was up there at the North Pole but
all of the rest of them got together in
our supercontinent at the equator which
has been given the name ken or land so
we were pretty sure that these snowball
events happen and when they happen they
last for 10 million years or so before
the volcanoes break things back out
again so how did life survive any of
this
you
with the whole surface of the planet
covered in ice
you should think that it would shut off
any access to light and photosynthesis
so all of those blue-green algae would
be in real trouble because that's their
source of energy and so there would be
some sort of mass die back but perhaps
there were some thin regions of ice
perhaps there were some small areas of
land that were exposed but it's still
been pretty cold perhaps but again I
think it's volcanoes that save the day
this is a picture of some hot springs up
in Iceland and lots of blue-green algae
and all sorts of interesting biological
specimens growing in the hot spring
water
and these few pockets would have perhaps
remained ice-free and warm enough for
life to cling on just in these few
pockets of geothermal activity
around about the surface
but it will also have been able to
Klingon in the deep ocean where hot
water and superheated steam and minerals
come pouring out of the ocean floor in
what we call black smokers you get a lot
of organisms there that live on the
chemistry of the material that's coming
out they don't depend on the light of
the Sun and this may well have been
where life first got going on the earth
all the evidence of the very first
instances of living creatures points to
them having evolved at these black
smokers on the ocean floor and any such
life down there wouldn't even have
noticed that the entire surface of the
earth was now covered in ice
now this is where people haven't had a
light bulb moment perhaps he thought
this global Ice Age this snowball earth
was the trigger that broke life away
from its complacent state of slime world
where nothing had really changed for
three billion years perhaps it led to
the explosion of the number of species
and the complexity of life suddenly life
would have been presented with a near
clean sheet once there ice went away and
the diagram on the right here is just
the period from the snowball going
forwards showing the numbers of species
on a sort of upward trend and then there
are a number of little yellow circles
with numbers in those are the big five
or six
mass extinction events number one number
two number three there number four and
number five number five is the event
where the dinosaurs died out 65 million
years ago between the K and the T that's
often called the KT boundary event
number one is the end Ordovician
we talk more about that another time and
then the great dying number three
they're the end-permian event was a very
substantial drop in the number of
species but before zero there they were
almost none
almost all the complex species on earth
suddenly appeared at the end of this
snowball period and so suddenly as we
saw the oceans were teeming with life
like this
and that's a big jump to make to go from
slime world to this almost overnight
mm-hmm well that's not quite what
happened as it turns out future research
has shown its life was heading towards
complexity even before the beginning of
the Cambrian period we can squeeze back
from 5 4 5 to 5 5 5 million years ago
with this dick and Sonia fossil that was
found in Australia and
let's er pushed it back about ten
million years Newfoundland we can go
back a bit further another ten million
years with the mistaken point fossils
another ten million a little bit further
up the coast to five seven five and we
eat all of these and looking at the DNA
we actually managed to recovered samples
of DNA from all of these fossils and you
can figure out how the tree of life has
evolved by looking at the number of
mutations in the DNA
here's an example of how it's changed
over time with different plant species
around about in the last 300 million
years and we can figure out what evolved
from what by looking at how many
mutations have occurred in that
molecular clock so you can pace the
whole history of life better and in fact
trace it back before the Cambrian and
discover that maybe another 500 million
years before that and the single-celled
creatures were just beginning to get
together and form multicellular ones
it was then once they got the trick of
multicellular ISM that really that
enabled all of the rest of the
complexity to form it's another part
that shows the history of life again all
the way back to 4600 million years ago
and it seems that life has had quite a
bumpy ride over all of that time and
it's those bumps that give life a nudge
because it shakes it out of its complex
over out of its er complacency and makes
it move on now
astronomical all of this of course is
the Sun and the Sun has been getting
hotter ever since it was formed the
diagram here showing how the radius of
the Sun in fact is increasing this is as
it's gradually turning hydrogen to
helium in the core it's slowly swelling
up
and the temperature of the surface
staying about the same at the moment
but the
output the total power output is the red
line so you can see that it was quite a
lot cooler in the past being on earth
than it is now because of the power
output of the Sun has been increasing
and he's going to carry on increasing
and we'll see the end of all life on
Earth in about a billion years time due
to the fact that it's going to become a
red giant
so at the moment we live nicely in the
habitable zone Mercury and Venus are too
toasty warm and Mars is just on the
outer edge of that but of course that
chart shows that the Sun is gradually
putting out more heat and so we are
going to get warmer and warmer and
likewise Mars is going to warm up well
that'll from us because the temperature
of the areas are pretty chilly -5 on a
good day to minus 87 on a not so good
day and all of the water that's left is
frozen solid into the permafrost
so maybe warming that up will mean that
we might one day have to abandon living
on the earth and take a step outwards to
the fourth Rock from the Sun
eventually the Sun is going to start
really swelling up and that habitable
zone is going to sweep outwards past
Mars and leave it behind and out to the
outer planets being at a sensible life
for supporting temperature now I
wouldn't think we would ever go and live
on Jupiter or Saturn but those are not
the only bodies out there it's three
snowball worlds of the outer solar
system we've got Ceres in the asteroid
belt
Europa moon of Jupiter and Ganymede
they're also moan of Jupiter so the
first phase of the warming might be to
melt the ice on these worlds and maybe
end their snowball lock-ins and maybe
that will be the trigger for any life
that's trapped underneath the ice and
maybe that's what's responsible for this
red coloration coming up through the
cracks on Europa maybe that will release
the brakes and cause a period of rapid
explosive evolution on these worlds if
of course there's any life there at all
which at the moment we just don't know
at at Saturn very interesting middle
world Titan there that's a imaged by
Cassini might well get warmed up to the
point of being able to break free of
being locked in rather a deep freeze
and Enceladus tat Titan as well but at
Saturn as well whereas plumes of
material coming out through the tiger
stripes and those are carrying with them
organic materials and hydrogen and
that's exactly the signature that you
expect from the chemistry of iron sulfur
living bacteria living at the boundary
between the rocky core and the under the
ice ocean the chemistry of that says
that iron sulfide reacts with water and
one of the outputs of that is molecular
hydrogen and that is something which I
am loving bacteria produce on earth at
the moment so maybe that's what's going
on deep in the core of Enceladus and
maybe once the Sun warms up and they
might ice here melts this will no longer
be a snowball world either there are two
more moons of Saturn rear and the Oni
that are in this state and even out its
earnest
we have Oberon an aerial here two moons
there that are snowball worlds that
covered in ice who knows what's going on
underneath it was right out at the outer
reaches we have Triton and Pluto here
Triton moon of Neptune both showing
interesting chemistry on their surface I
wonder what will happen to them when
they get warmed up now the bad news is
that you'll only have 500 million years
while the Sun is in its red giant state
not the 10 billion that the inner
planets have had by that point
500 million years was enough to go from
the Precambrian single-celled organisms
to produce all the complexity of life
that we see around us that's when all
the interesting stuff has happened so
who knows what's going to happen in the
outer parts of the solar system while
the Sun is being a red giant
of course you're likely to come to a
sticky end when it finally dies shortly
afterwards but it might be a good 500
million year run and again we think that
the black smokers that are probably
happening on all of those ice worlds at
the rock water boundary underneath them
is where life got going on earth so why
not on all of these snowy worlds out
there and so that's it
it's the end of the talk I put together
about the snowball earth